[DRAFT]: Docs for usage with typescript (#3201)
reduxjs/redux: docs/advanced/UsageWithTypescript.md

```ts
// src/store/chat/actions.ts

import { Message, ChatActions } from './types'

export function sendMessage(newMessage: Message) {
  return {
    type: ChatActions.SendMessage,
    payload: newMessage
  }
}
```

System Action Constants & Shape:

```ts
// src/store/system/types.ts

export enum SystemActions {
  UpdateSession = 'UPDATE_SESSION'
}

interface UpdateSessionAction {
  type: SystemActions.UpdateSession
  payload: SystemState
}

export type SystemActionTypes = UpdateSessionAction
```

With these types we can now also type check system's action creators:

```ts
// src/store/system/actions.ts

import { SystemActions, SystemState } from './types'

export function updateSession(newSession: SystemState) {
  return {
    type: SystemActions.UpdateSession,
    payload: newSession
  }
}
```

## Type Checking Reducers

Reducers are just pure functions that take the previous state, an action and then return the next state.

Type checked chat reducer:

```ts
// src/store/chat/reducers.ts

import { ChatState, ChatActions, ChatActionTypes } from './types'

const initialState: ChatState = {
  messages: []
}

> export function chatReducer(state = initialState, action: ChatActionTypes) {

Reviewer: please explicitly indicate the type of return value is `ChatState`, otherwise the return value is not type-safe.

  switch (action.type) {
    case ChatActions.SendMessage:
      return {
        messages: [...state.messages, action.payload]
      }
    default:
      return state
  }
}
```

Type checked system reducer:

```ts
// src/store/system/reducers.ts

import { SystemActions, SystemState, SystemActionTypes } from './types'

const initialState: SystemState = {
  loggedIn: false,
  session: '',
  userName: ''
}

> export function systemReducer(state = initialState, action: SystemActionTypes) {

Reviewer: please explicitly indicate the type of return value is `SystemState`, otherwise the return value is not type-safe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export function systemReducer(state = initialState, action: SystemActionTypes): SystemState {
```
it would be better because in practice we may accidentally return a wrong object. this change ensures that you need to always return a `SystemState`.

# Usage with TypeScript

**TypeScript** is a typed superset of JavaScript. It has become popular recently in applications due to the benefits it can bring. If you are new to TypeScript it is highly recommended to become familiar with it first before proceeding. You can check out its documentation [here.](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/typescript-in-5-minutes.html)

TypeScript has the potential to bring the following benefits to a Redux application:

1. Type safety for reducers, state and action creators
2. Easy refactoring of typed code
3. A superior developer experience in a team environment

## A Practical Example

We will be going through a simplistic chat application to demonstrate a possible approach to include static typing. This chat application will have two reducers. The _chat reducer_ will focus on storing the chat history and the _system reducer_ will focus on storing session information.

The full source code is available on [codesandbox here](https://codesandbox.io/s/w02m7jm3q7). Note that by going through this example yourself you will experience some of the benefits of using TypeScript.

## Type Checking State

> Type checking each slice of state is simple when you understand that each slice of state is just an object.

Reviewer 2: I'd caveat this somehow to emphasize "in this example".  Slices of state aren't necessarily objects, they could be anything - a counter, an array, etc.

> Describing the state shape of the chat reducer's slice of state:

Reviewer 2: Phrasing on this sentence is awkward.  Perhaps something like:  "Adding types to each slice of state is a good place to start.  In this example, we start by describing the type of the chat reducer's slices of state: "

```ts
// src/store/chat/types.ts

export interface Message {
  user: string
  message: string
  timestamp: number
}

export interface ChatState {
  messages: Message[]
}
```

> Describing the state shape of the system reducer's slice of state:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And then do the same for the system reducer's slice of state:
```

```ts
// src/store/system/types.ts

export interface SystemState {
  loggedIn: boolean
  session: string
  userName: string
}
```

Note that we are exporting these interfaces to reuse them later in reducers and action creators.

## Type Checking Actions & Action Creators

We will be using TypeScript's enums to declare our action constants. [Enums](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/enums.html) allow us to define a set of named constants.

Chat Action Constants & Shape:

```ts

> // src/store/chat/types.ts

Reviewer 2: Ought to discuss why the types are being declared in a separate file - what's the tradeoff here?

export enum ChatActions {
  SendMessage = 'SEND_MESSAGE'
}

interface SendMessageAction {
  type: ChatActions.SendMessage
  payload: Message
}

export type ChatActionTypes = SendMessageAction
```

Note that you can use TypeScript's Union Type to express multiple actions like so:

```ts
export type ChatActionTypes = SendMessageAction | DeleteMessageAction
```

> With these types declared we can now also type check chat's action creators. In this case we are taking advantage of TypeScript's inference to avoid verbosity:

Reviewer 2: As opposed to... what?

It might be worth showing a commented-out example of what the "verbose" approach would be in comparison.  (I assume it would involve hand-declaring the type of the action creator.)

```ts
// src/store/chat/actions.ts

import { Message, ChatActions } from './types'

export function sendMessage(newMessage: Message) {
  return {
    type: ChatActions.SendMessage,
    payload: newMessage
  }
}
```

System Action Constants & Shape:

```ts
// src/store/system/types.ts

export enum SystemActions {
  UpdateSession = 'UPDATE_SESSION'
}

interface UpdateSessionAction {
  type: SystemActions.UpdateSession
  payload: SystemState
}

export type SystemActionTypes = UpdateSessionAction
```

With these types we can now also type check system's action creators:

```ts
// src/store/system/actions.ts

import { SystemActions, SystemState } from './types'

export function updateSession(newSession: SystemState) {
  return {
    type: SystemActions.UpdateSession,
    payload: newSession
  }
}
```

## Type Checking Reducers

Reducers are just pure functions that take the previous state, an action and then return the next state.

> Type checked chat reducer:

Reviewer 2: Add some description here explaining what exactly is being done in comparison to a plain JS reducer (ie, importing the state and action types and referencing them).

```ts
// src/store/chat/reducers.ts

import { ChatState, ChatActions, ChatActionTypes } from './types'

const initialState: ChatState = {
  messages: []
}

export function chatReducer(
  state = initialState,
  action: ChatActionTypes
): ChatState {
  switch (action.type) {
    case ChatActions.SendMessage:
      return {
        messages: [...state.messages, action.payload]
      }
    default:
      return state
  }
}
```

Type checked system reducer:

```ts
// src/store/system/reducers.ts

import { SystemActions, SystemState, SystemActionTypes } from './types'

const initialState: SystemState = {
  loggedIn: false,
  session: '',
  userName: ''
}

export function systemReducer(
  state = initialState,
  action: SystemActionTypes
): SystemState {
  switch (action.type) {
    case SystemActions.UpdateSession: {
      return {
        ...state,
        ...action.payload
      }
    }
    default:
      return state
  }
}
```

> Putting it all together in combine reducers, note that we do not have to explicitly declare a new interface for AppState. We can use `ReturnType` to infer state shape from the `rootReducer`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We now need to generate the root reducer function, which is normally done using `combineReducers`.  Note that we do not have to explicitly declare a new interface for AppState. We can use `ReturnType` to infer state shape from the `rootReducer`.
```

And hey, that state shape inference is cool!

TypeScript has the potential to bring the following benefits to a Redux application:

1. Type safety for reducers, state and action creators
2. Easy refactoring of typed code
3. A superior developer experience in a team environment

## A Practical Example

We will be going through a simplistic chat application to demonstrate a possible approach to include static typing. This chat application will have two reducers. The _chat reducer_ will focus on storing the chat history and the _system reducer_ will focus on storing session information.

The full source code is available on [codesandbox here](https://codesandbox.io/s/w02m7jm3q7). Note that by going through this example yourself you will experience some of the benefits of using TypeScript.

## Type Checking State

Type checking each slice of state is simple when you understand that each slice of state is just an object.

Describing the state shape of the chat reducer's slice of state:

```ts
// src/store/chat/types.ts

> export interface IMessage {

Reviewer 3: It is discouraged to use the `IName` convention in interfaces since TypeScript is structurally, not nominally, typed.

Consider using `Message`, `ChatState`, instead of `IMessage`, `IChatState`.

  user: string
  message: string
  timestamp: number
}

export interface IChatState {
  messages: IMessage[]
}
```

Describing the state shape of the system reducer's slice of state:

```ts
// src/store/system/types.ts

export interface ISystemState {
  loggedIn: boolean
  session: string
  userName: string
}
```

Note that we are exporting these interfaces to reuse them later in application state and action creators.

We can now create an interface which describes the global store:

```ts
// src/store/index.ts

export interface IAppState {
  system: ISystemState
  chat: IChatState
}
```

## Type Checking Actions & Action Creators

We will be using TypeScript's enums to declare our action constants. [Enums](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/enums.html) allow us to define a set of named constants.

Chat Action Constants and Actions:

```ts
// src/store/chat/types.ts

export enum ChatActions {

>   SendMessage = '@CHAT:SEND/MESSAGE'

Reviewer 3: I personally prefer using raw strings instead of enums. A discriminant union will give you appropriate type checking. The only downside is that your action creators might emit the wrong kind of action. YMMV

One should also mention that exporting an enum here is not useful - the name `ChatActions` to me implies it is a discriminant union type, and the code would greatly benefit from having this for type safety. So, instead of `export enum ChatActions`, consider

```ts
// src/store/chat/types.ts
export type ChatActions =
  | SendMessageAction
```
and of course you could extend that discriminant union. You can then pass that union to a reducer, which enables exhaustive type checking!

>   SendMessage = '@CHAT:SEND/MESSAGE'

Reviewer 4: +1 for string literals.  Like @danpantry says, they give you great type safety while being easy to understand even for TS beginners.

}

export interface ISendMessageAction {
  type: ChatActions.SendMessage
  payload: IMessage
}
```

With these types we can now also type check chat's action creators:

```ts
// src/store/chat/actions.ts

import { IMessage, ISendMessageAction, ChatActions } from './types'

export type sendMessageType = (newMessage: IMessage) => ISendMessageAction

export const sendMessage: sendMessageType = newMessage => ({
  type: ChatActions.SendMessage,
  payload: newMessage

> })

Reviewer 5: I'd prefer to just declare this as a hoisted function instead of an arrow function:

```ts
import { IMessage, ISendMessageAction, ChatActions } from './types'

export function sendMessage(newMessage: IMessage): ISendMessageAction {
  return {
    type: ChatActions.SendMessage,
    payload: newMessage
  }
}
```

`sendMessageType` is literally just `typeof sendMessage` so I didn't think it was needed to declare separately.

```

System Action Constants and Actions:

```ts
// src/store/system/types.ts

export enum SystemActions {
  UpdateSession = '@SYSTEM:UPDATE/SESSION'
}

export interface IUpdateSessionAction {
  type: SystemActions.UpdateSession
  payload: ISystemState
}
```

With these types we can now also type check system's action creators:

```ts
// src/store/system/actions.ts

import { SystemActions, IUpdateSessionAction, ISystemState } from './types'

export type updateSessionType = (
  newSession: ISystemState
) => IUpdateSessionAction

export const updateSession: updateSessionType = newSession => ({
  type: SystemActions.UpdateSession,
  payload: newSession

> })

Reviewer 5: Same here, can be a hoisted function, don't need the separate `updateSessionType`.

Reviewer 3: +1. It's really rare to define function types like this in my experience. It would be more intuitive to do this:

```ts
function updateSession(newSession: SystemState) {
  return { type: SystemActions.UpdateSession, payload: newSession }
}
```

You would not commonly define a type alias here unless you needed it to be re-usable

Reviewer 2: FWIW, I personally do tend to write action creators as:

```js
function doTheThing(arg1, arg2) {
    return {
        type : DO_THE_THING,
        payload : {arg1, arg2}
    };
}
```

But maybe I'm not in the majority on that :)

```

## Type Checking Reducers

Reducers are just pure functions that take the previous state, an action and then return the next state. Redux provides a `Reducer` type which can be imported to assist with type checking.

Type checked chat reducer:

```ts
// src/store/chat/reducers.ts

import { Reducer } from 'redux'
import { IChatState, ChatActions } from './types'

const initialState: IChatState = {
  messages: []
}

> export const chatReducer: Reducer<IChatState> = (

Reviewer 3: I don't think the explicit `Reducer` type is necessary. TypeScripts strength comes in using as few explicit types as possible - Consider using this instead:

```ts
interface SendMessageAction {
   type: typeof ChatActions.SendMessage,
   payload: Message
}
function chatReducer(state: IChatState, action: SendMessageAction) {
  switch (action.type) {
    return {
      messages: [...state.messages, action.payload]
    }
  }
}
```

one downside of this approach is that while the type checking at compile time *is exhaustive*, your function *may receive* inputs that do not match the appropriate actions at runtime. For example, `{ type: '@@redux/init' }`. I don't think there's a way to work around this, though.

  state = initialState,
  action
) => {

>   switch (action.type) {

Reviewer 5: Refinements won't work unless you give the second generic argument to `Reducer` with the list of actions you support.

Reviewer 3: +1 to @Kovensky. Again, I would recommend avoiding the `Reducer` type declaration altogether and rely on TypeScripts structural typing and just define the function as a hoisted function.

    case ChatActions.SendMessage: {
      return {
        messages: [...state.messages, action.payload]
      }
    }
    default:
      return state
  }
}
```

Type checked system reducer:

```ts
// src/store/system/reducers.ts

import { Reducer } from 'redux'
import { SystemActions, ISystemState } from './types'

const initialState: ISystemState = {
  loggedIn: false,
  session: '',
  userName: ''
}

> export const systemReducer: Reducer<ISystemState> = (

Reviewer 3: This is more of a criticism of the code than the TypeScript: IMO it's best practice to have one reducer manage *one thing*. Instead of having a state object with multiple values, you should have each reducer manage one part of each state unless that state is instrinically tied together (in most cases, state that is that tightly coupled can be derived state).

For example, `loggedIn: false` could be determined by whether or not `session` is equal to `null`. `session` should be `null` as should `userName` with absent values.

Just my 2c - this could be changed to be two reducers, which would help keep the state flat - which is important in Redux!

```ts
export function sessionReducer(opaqueSessionToken: string | null, action: Action) {
  ...
}

export function usernameReducer(username: string | null, action: Action) {
  ...
}

// src/store/index.ts
const rootReducer = combineReducers({
  user: userReducer,
  session: sessionReducer,
  chat: chatReducer
})
```

  state = initialState,
  action
) => {
  switch (action.type) {
    case SystemActions.UpdateSession: {
      return {
        ...state,
        ...action.payload
      }
    }
    default: {
      return state
    }
  }
}
```

Putting it all together in combine reducers:

```ts
// src/store/index.ts

import { systemReducer } from './system/reducers'
import { ISystemState } from './system/types'

import { chatReducer } from './chat/reducers'
import { IChatState } from './chat/types'

export interface IAppState {
  system: ISystemState
  chat: IChatState
}

> const rootReducer: Reducer<IAppState> = combineReducers({

Reviewer 3: Once again, you do not need to use `Reducer<IAppState>` here.

Also, defining `IAppState` here is not actually required! you can instead do this:

```ts
const rootReducer = combineReducers({ system, chat })
export type AppState = ReturnType<typeof rootReducer>
```

This can save some hassle in larger state trees

The full source code is available on [codesandbox here](https://codesandbox.io/s/w02m7jm3q7). Note that by going through this example yourself you will experience some of the benefits of using TypeScript.

## Type Checking State

Adding types to each slice of state is a good place to start since it does not rely on other types. In this example we start by describing the chat reducer's slice of state:

```ts
// src/store/chat/types.ts

export interface Message {
  user: string
  message: string
  timestamp: number
}

export interface ChatState {
  messages: Message[]
}
```

And then do the same for the system reducer's slice of state:

```ts
// src/store/system/types.ts

export interface SystemState {
  loggedIn: boolean
  session: string
  userName: string
}
```

Note that we are exporting these interfaces to reuse them later in reducers and action creators.

## Type Checking Actions & Action Creators

> We will be using TypeScript's enums to declare our action constants. [Enums](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/enums.html) allow us to define a set of named constants. Note that we are making a tradeoff here when we declare our types in a sperate file. In exchange for seperating our types into a seperate file, we get to keep our other files more focussed on their purpose. While this tradeoff can improve the maintainability of the codebase, it is perfectly fine to organize your project however you see fit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will be using TypeScript's enums to declare our action constants. [Enums](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/enums.html) allow us to define a set of named constants. Note that we are making a tradeoff here when we declare our types in a separate file. In exchange for separating our types into a separate file, we get to keep our other files more focused on their purpose. While this tradeoff can improve the maintainability of the codebase, it is perfectly fine to organize your project however you see fit.
```

Chat Action Constants & Shape:

```ts
// src/store/chat/types.ts

export enum ChatActions {
  SendMessage = 'SEND_MESSAGE'
}

interface SendMessageAction {
  type: ChatActions.SendMessage
  payload: Message
}

export type ChatActionTypes = SendMessageAction
```

Note that you can use TypeScript's Union Type to express multiple actions like so:

```ts

> export type ChatActionTypes = SendMessageAction | DeleteMessageAction

Reviewer 2: Could we just go ahead and have the "delete message" action be included in the example overall, so we don't have to show this separately?  Could add the "Note that" line as a comment above the union.

```

With these types declared we can now also type check chat's action creators. In this case we are taking advantage of TypeScript's inference to avoid verbosity:

```ts
// src/store/chat/actions.ts

import { Message, ChatActions } from './types'

export function sendMessage(newMessage: Message) {
  return {
    type: ChatActions.SendMessage,
    payload: newMessage
  }
}
```

> Side note: to appreciate TypeScript's inference, here is what a more verbose version would look like:

Reviewer 2: This doesn't feel _too_ much more verbose.  Could maybe just emphasize that the return type is what's being inferred, with a commented-out version of the function declaration line shown right above the actual line of code for comparison?

Reviewer 6: I prefer to add the return type myself. It makes it more obvious what that action will actually be created. This in turn makes it easier once you refactor the payload of that action. With the less verbose example you might get the error in an unrelated file or none at all. With explicit annotation you get the error message where it originates.

Reviewer 7: I generally think inference is more of a personal preference than anything else, it's not better or worse. Some people like verbose and others don't 😄. 

> or none at all

Should basically only occur when you are not consuming a property that was typed. For instance if you remove a payload from the return of an action creator (that is being infered) that was never used in the first place.

      return {
        messages: [...state.messages, action.payload]
      }
    default:
      return state
  }
}
```

Type checked system reducer:

```ts
// src/store/system/reducers.ts

import { SystemActions, SystemState, SystemActionTypes } from './types'

const initialState: SystemState = {
  loggedIn: false,
  session: '',
  userName: ''
}

export function systemReducer(
  state = initialState,
  action: SystemActionTypes
): SystemState {
  switch (action.type) {
    case SystemActions.UpdateSession: {
      return {
        ...state,
        ...action.payload
      }
    }
    default:
      return state
  }
}
```

We now need to generate the root reducer function, which is normally done using `combineReducers`. Note that we do not have to explicitly declare a new interface for AppState. We can use `ReturnType` to infer state shape from the `rootReducer`.

```ts
// src/store/index.ts

import { systemReducer } from './system/reducers'
import { chatReducer } from './chat/reducers'

const rootReducer = combineReducers({
  system: systemReducer,
  chat: chatReducer
})

export type AppState = ReturnType<typeof rootReducer>
```

## Usage with React-Redux

> While react-redux is a separate library from redux itself, it is commonly used with react. For this reason, we will go through how react-redux works with TypeScript using the same example used previously in this section.

Reviewer 2: Capitalize React-Redux everywhere.

Reviewer 8: Actually, it's "React Redux". No dash, that's just the package name.

// src/store/chat/types.ts

> export enum ChatActions {

Reviewer 3: I'm still not sure about the use of this enum.

One of the problems of using an enum here is that it is only possible to have type correctness if you refer to the enum. That is, the following is a compiler error:

```typescript
const foo: SendMessageAction = {
  type: 'SEND_MESSAGE', // "SEND_MESSAGE" is not assignable to `ChatActions`
  payload: ...
}
```

Which feels surprising. Is the motivation for using an enum just to prevent duplication of string literals?

Author: This is a valid concern, the motivation is definitely for preventing duplication of string literals. If one has to type the same string literal twice then there is a chance for an error/typo which typescript will consider valid (as far as I am concerned).

Regarding the issue you pointed out it does become a problem if you use actions with string literals. This doesn't become a concern if you strictly use action creators (assuming the action creators' type points to the enum).

Reviewer 3: > there is a chance for an error/typo which typescript will consider valid (as far as I am concerned).

This is not true.

```ts
interface SendMessageAction {
  type: "SEND_MESSAGE",
  payload: ...
}

const foo: SendMessageAction {
  type: "foo", // compiler error: Type string is not assignable to "SEND_MESSAGE"
  payload: ...
}

const foo: SendMessageAction {
  type: "SEND_MESSAGE", // no problem
  payload: ...
}

function reducer(state: any, action: SendMessageAction | { type: unknown }) {
  switch (action.type) {
    case 'SEND_MESSAGE':
      // type is narrowed to SendMessageAction
      return state
  }
  return state
}
```

  SendMessage = 'SEND_MESSAGE',
  DeleteMessage = 'DELETE_MESSAGE'
}

interface SendMessageAction {
  type: ChatActions.SendMessage
  payload: Message
}

interface DeleteMessageAction {
  type: ChatActions.DeleteMessage

>   timestamp: number

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't we encourage using [FSA](https://github.com/redux-utilities/flux-standard-action)? If so, `timestamp` should be `meta: { timestamp }` instead.

Author: If I am not mistaken the flux library is what suggested the `payload` and `meta` format for actions. Redux actions do not require a meta field, only the type field is required. I would like to keep actions and its nomenclature consistent with the rest of the documentation. Another point to take into consideration is that many people who learn Redux aren't coming from the flux library anymore.

Reviewer 2: Not quite.  `payload` and `meta` are from the ["Flux Standard Actions" community standard](https://github.com/redux-utilities/flux-standard-action), which was developed by Andrew Clark.  While Redux doesn't require FSA structure, a very large percentage of Redux apps use an FSA-based approach.

Author: Thanks for clarifying, I'll take that as changing the actions in this example to follow FSA.

With these additions made props that come from redux's side are now being type checked. Feel free to extend the interface as necessary to account for additional props being passed down from parent components.

## Usage with Redux Thunk

Redux Thunk is a commonly used middleware for asynchronous orchestration. Feel free to check out its documentation [here](https://github.com/reduxjs/redux-thunk). A thunk is a function that returns another function that takes parameters `dispatch` and `getState`. We will define a type which describes this in a new file:

```ts
// src/types.ts

import { Dispatch } from 'redux'
import { AppState } from './store'

> export type ThunkType<T> = (dispatch: Dispatch, getState?: AppState) => T

Reviewer 4: `redux-thunk` in fact has typings so perhaps it'd make more sense to use `ThunkAction` from [redux-thunk/index.d.ts](https://github.com/reduxjs/redux-thunk/blob/master/index.d.ts)?

It's great you've included redux-thunk in these docs.  Definitely belongs here.
